"borrow checker invariants" section of the (#2867)
google/comprehensive-rust: src/idiomatic/leveraging-the-type-system/borrow-checker-invariants/phantomdata-03-lifetimes.md

---
minutes: 15
---

# PhantomData 3/4: Lifetimes for External Resources

The invariants of external resources often match what we can do with lifetime
rules.

```rust,editable
// use std::marker::PhantomData;

/// Direct FFI to a database library in C.
/// We got this API as is, we have no influence over it.
mod ffi {
    pub type DatabaseHandle = u8; // maximum 255 databases open at the same time

    fn database_open(name: *const std::os::raw::c_char) -> DatabaseHandle {
        unimplemented!()
    }
    // ... etc.
}

struct DatabaseConnection(ffi::DatabaseHandle);
struct Transaction<'a>(&'a mut DatabaseConnection);

impl DatabaseConnection {
    fn new_transaction(&mut self) -> Transaction<'_> {
        Transaction(self)
    }
}

fn main() {}
```

<details>

- Remember the transaction API from the
  [Aliasing XOR Mutability](./aliasing-xor-mutability.md) example.

  We held onto a mutable reference to the database connection within the
  transaction type to lock out the database while a transaction is active.

  In this example, we want to model a `Transaction` API on what we're given by

>   an external, non-rust API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  an external, non-Rust API.
```

>   We start this by defining a `Transaction` type that holds onto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We start by defining a `Transaction` type that holds onto
```

  `&mut DatabaseConnection`.

- Ask: What are the limits of this implementation? Assume the `u8` is accurate

>   implementation wise and enough information for us to use the external API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  implementation-wise and enough information for us to use the external API.
```

  Expect:

>   - Indirection takes up 7 bytes more than we need to on a 64bit platform, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Indirection takes up 7 bytes more than we need to on a 64-bit platform, as
```

    well as involving a pointer dereference.

- Problem: We want to have a transaction have this "connection" to the database
  connection that created it, but we don't want to hand over a "real" reference.

- Ask: What happens when we remove the mutable reference in `Transaction` while
  keeping the lifetime parameter?

  Expect: Unused lifetime parameter!

- Like with the type tagging from the previous slides, we can bring in
  `PhantomData` to capture this unused lifetime parameter for us.

  The difference is that we will need to use the lifetime alongside another
  type, but that other type does not matter too much.

- Demonstrate: change `Transaction` to the following:

  ```rust,compile_fail
  pub struct Transaction<'a> {
      connection: DatabaseConnection,
      _phantom: PhantomData<&mut 'a ()>,
  }
  ```

  And change the `new_transaction` function for `DatabaseConnection` to the

>   following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Update the `DatabaseConnection::new_transaction()` method:
```

  ```rust,compile_fail
  fn new_transaction<'a>(&'a mut self) -> Transaction<'a> {
      Transaction { connection: DatabaseConnection(self.0), _phantom: PhantomData }
  }
  ```

  This gives an owned database connection that is tied to the
  `DatabaseConnection` that created it, but without any runtime memory footprint

>   as the pass-a-reference version did.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that the store-a-reference version did.
```

  Because `PhantomData` is a zero-sized type (like `()` or
  `struct MyZeroSizedType;`), the size of `Transaction` is now the same as `u8`.

>   The implementation that held onto a reference instead had the size `usize`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The implementation that held onto a reference instead was as large as a `usize`.
```
